Welcome back, Sarah and David. Great to have you.
We've got you for up to 30 minutes.
We'll just maybe let you kick off with some introductory comments and things, and
we'll hand over for some bit of Q&A.
Okay. Thank you, Chairman.
Tēnā koutou katoa. I'm David Woods, the chair of New Zealand Green Investment
Finance, and I'm joined by our Chief Executive, Sarah Mehinnick.
We were established to accelerate investment in New Zealand's decarbonization and
emissions reduction to help address a perceived market failure.
One of our key aims was to secure co-investment of private capital to address the
scale of the climate investment challenge.
As you're aware, in April 2025, our shareholding ministers
announced that the government had decided to wind down NZGIFF's existing
portfolio of investments, and ultimately exit those investments over time.
Ministers' expectations were, and continue to be, that we will meet all legal
obligations and operate in a financially sustainable and self-funding
manner during the wind down period.
We're well advanced in that process and are achieving good results.
We've returned total capital to the Crown of over $500 million since our
wind down plan was approved by our shareholding ministers, both through
canceling uncalled shares and through cash distributions of 216
million. There is still work to do, as we have some remaining investment
positions to exit. These are complex structures that take time to
manage. However, the board is confident in the team that we have
and their ability to deliver the best outcome for the taxpayer in the
circumstances. We will answer all questions from the committee as fully as
possible, but we request members' understanding that we must protect legally and
commercially sensitive information.
Is that-
That's
... okay. Thank you. Might kick off with Dr. Megan Woods.
Thank you.
Look, thank you very much for the work you've done.
Obviously, the committee's really interested to know more about your wind down
process, what that looks like, particularly around existing
investments, what's happening with those.
And also, I think, looking through the questions from memory, there were 16 staff,
in terms of the transitional arrangements and what's happening with the staff, just
to start with.
If I start with the staff-
Mm-hmm
... there were 16, I think, when we were here last year. There are four today.
Right. Okay.
And the board is concerned to-
Yeah
... keep those staff in place because of the complexity
of the exit process from the remaining-
Mm-hmm
... investments.
Mm-hmm. Thank you.
In terms of detail, I can't really talk about individual
investments-
Yeah, obviously
... and how we've exited-
Yeah
... individual investments. We have sold about two-thirds of our total
investments, since the wind down plan was
approved. We have a small number of both equity and debt
investments. The total commitment still outstanding is about $80
million if I take undrawn commitments and investments.
So of the investments that you have been able to sell, how many of them have
been sold into New Zealand ownership?
Sarah, do you want to-
Mm. Almost everything.
Okay. Mm. That's great. In terms of
the
hole that's going to be left in the market,
do you see that being filled by other
entities? Or do you think there will be a gap?
I-
Sorry if that's too difficult for you to answer.
I think it's a policy question-
Yeah, sure
... that really government has to address.
Yeah. No. Fair enough. Yep.
You good, Megan?
Yep. Someone else can go-
Dan
... and then I'll come back in.
Thank you, David, and to yourself, for the work you've done in winding this down,
and to your team. I know it must be a testing time for them
as they go through the process.
Just in terms of timelines to get that, hopefully, 80
million or so, what's your expectations or the
ministers' expectations around when that would be liquidated and
returned to government?
We're in discussion with Treasury and with the shareholding ministers.
We expect the divestments stage of the process will
finish during the next financial year, so the year to June
2027.
Yeah.
We'd like it to finish sooner, but it's really a question of
the process we have to go through. For instance, most of our equity
positions have preemptive rights, and that takes up time.
Yeah.
So we're working through it as quickly as we can.
And are you able to give us indication of, I guess, your investments?
You'd have, like, a book value on those investments versus-
Yes
... the realized value.
Is there much difference in-
No, just give us-
... between those two, and if so,
give us a sense of that.
I'll let Sarah take the detail, but the board's very satisfied that-
Yes
... we're exiting as close to par as we can in-
Right
... most of them.
Yeah. Okay.
Yeah, the exits have been pleasing.
We were concerned
this time last year when we were in the planning phases of the process that we
could achieve elegant exits that would deliver value back to the
Crown, but also, be done in a way that was
palatable for the portfolio companies, and I think we've held that balance
quite nicely. If we put Solar Zero to one side, because that's still
ongoing, our blended recovery rate has been
around 83 to 84% on average. Some of
them have obviously been much higher.
The recoveries on the debt have been very good,
and
I think that that is appropriate given that the
portfolio was not
in breach.
Mm-hmm.
And for these assets, we are a seller,
a required seller, so there will be a discount naturally.
Yeah. No, thank you very much.
Todd Stevenson.
Yeah, thanks for being here.
Mm.
Have you given any thought, obviously, over the
life of the organization, and even in the wind down, there's probably quite a lot
of learnings and insights, et cetera.
Have you given any thought to how that could be passed on, whether it's to Treasury
or another central agency, so that what you've learned over the
life of the organization isn't kind of-
We're archiving all our records, and we're
happy to, at an appropriate time, have debriefing sessions with
various people. But at the moment, I don't think that time is
now.
No, but you've obviously given it some-
Yes
... thought, which I think is good.
Because I think, yeah, one of the things again, quite often the insights and
experiences are lost-
Mm
... across government.
Mm-hmm.
So I think just even that you're giving that some thought is great, and we can
follow up on that as well.
Mm-hmm.
I'm just going to go back to Dr. Megan Watts.
I was actually going to ask a similar question, and you have a huge
amount of knowledge about what is going to be a really important investment sector
in New Zealand's future. So I'm really pleased to know that
those insights are being captured.
And I'm aware this might be the last time you come to the Select Committee, so
thank you very much for your work.
Just in terms of the wind down plan, what are the
significant tasks that you see in that road
ahead and what do you see as some of the more significant
tasks you still need to complete?
I think we're still in the mode of selling assets-
Sure
... one by one. When we started, we looked, could we sell the whole portfolio?
That wasn't an option that was available at a realistic price.
So we have been divesting assets individually.
We will probably not be able to sell all of them, so there will
be a remaining set of assets, and we're in
discussions with Treasury about what needs to happen
then. Apart from the physical investments,
then we have to wind down all our
premises, our lease costs,
silly things like subscriptions-
Sure
... but the whole thing-
Yeah
... has to be wound out, and that will take a couple of months.
Yeah. So, obviously you can't go into the details of specific
assets, and I get that. But in terms of
those discussions with Treasury about what will happen with the
remaining assets, are you able to give us some options at a broad
level that have been canvassed?
I think it's really something that government-
We need to ask Treasury
... has to address.
Okay.
We are in detailed discussions with them.
Yeah. Just going back to one of your earlier answers, Sarah, it was you, I
think, that said you'd been sort of 84, 85%
recovery
on the value. It's fair to say that people know you have to sell,
isn't it?
Mm-hmm.
So that there is a discount.
In terms of the way we could have
done this, do you think there were alternative ways?
Obviously, you bypassed the portfolio approach because you saw there
was going to be too much of a haircut taken by
taking that approach. But if we'd done this over a longer period of time,
obviously holding onto the assets in different ways, in different parts of
government, do you think we could have actually preserved some of the equity, more
of the equity, if we'd done it differently?
To be honest, I haven't really given that-
Okay
... a great deal of thought, because it was a policy decision-
Yeah, sure. It wasn't your decision to make.
Yeah
... and we were just tasked with executing it.
Yeah. These are decisions for the ministers, right?
Yeah.
Yeah. I appreciate that.
But thank you for your work.
Thank you. Thanks, Megan. We're going to go Dr. David Wilson.
Yeah, just a learning question, really,
getting your reflection on it, and about scope and complementarity with
other funds, such as the Provincial Growth Fund, and of course, then it morphed
into the Regional Infrastructure Fund-
Sorry, David, we can't hear you. Can you talk into the microphone?
Yes.
Thank you.
Did you hear all of that?
Yes.
Yeah. So yeah, that's the question, the complementarity
and scope question. Because there's some
learnings there, I'm sure. Were we crossing over each other or?
No, there certainly are learnings.
We have had detailed discussions with Treasury about
different
areas-
Areas
... and complementarity.
Yeah.
But again, I'm afraid it's a policy question of what we want to do about that.
Yeah. No, I understand that, yeah.
From our perspective, it's a learning question.
Mm-hmm.
What did you learn from that environment?
I think on a more general level, we're very friendly with
all of our opposite numbers-
Yeah
... at all of these places. So David and I regularly talk to our counterparts at
ECER and NZGCP and Kanoa and
Ara Ake, various other places.
Yeah.
And there's quite a good spirit, I would say-
Mm-hmm
... amongst the execs and the
board members. So I suppose to the extent that's helpful, that has
been an ongoing theme of people engaging with each
other.
Right. It's really following on from your question earlier, Megan, framing it
slightly differently.
Mm-hmm.
Maybe a question for me, possibly for you as the chair, David, with regard
to some of the entities which you're potentially going to struggle to completely
wind down. Do you anticipate a transfer of that value into
another government entity via Treasury's guidance or something like that?
I think that that is clearly an option, but
we will continue selling assets, divesting
assets, until we're told to stop, and
we'll then deal with whatever is left over.
I'm just mindful-
Right
... obviously you've got that end date of
30th of June '26. That runway's running short.
Is that-
No, I think-
You expect everything to be materially completed by the 30th of June?
I think that's what we thought a year ago.
Okay.
But our new SPE has it running until the
end of this year, potentially early into the calendar year next year.
But we would like to have it finished by the end of this year.
So we may, in fact, see you again next year.
I don't know.
Well, thank you very much for that.
We do appear to be at the end of our questions, so thank you for the ongoing work-
Thanks very much
... and the updates today. Really appreciate it.
Thanks.
Thank you.
Thanks, David.